Feature/let executor (#69)
micro-ROS/micro-ROS.github.io: _docs/concepts/client_library/real-time_executor/index.md

---
title: Real-Time Executor
redirect_from: /real-time_executor/
permalink: /docs/concepts/client_library/real-time_executor/
--- 

 
## Table of contents

*   [Introduction](#introduction)
*   [ROS 2 Executor Concept](#ros-2-executor-concept)
*   [RCL Executor](#rcl-executor)
    * [API Layers](#api-layers)
    * [Concept](#concept)
    * [API](#api)
    * [Tutorial and Download](#tutorial-and-download)
*   [Background](#background)
    * [ROS 2 rclcpp Executor](#ros-2-rclcpp-executor)
    * [Complex semantics of the ROS 2 Executor](#complex-semantics-of-the-ros-2-executor)
    *   [Callback-group-level Executor](#callback-group-level-executor)
*   [Related Work](#related-work)
*   [Roadmap](#roadmap)
*   [References](#references)
*   [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)

## Introduction

> Predictable execution under given real-time constraints is a crucial requirement for many robotic applications, but is also a complex and time-consuming activity. While the service-based paradigm of ROS allows a fast integration of many different functionalities, it does not provide sufficient control over the execution management. For example,  there are no mechanisms to enforce a certain execution order of callbacks within a node, left alone to configure the  execution order of callbacks of different nodes in a ROS 2 system. This is essential for a high quality of control applications, which consist of cause-effect-chains like sensor acquisition, evaluation and actuation control, and operating on old data due to scheduling is not desired. Further more, when input data is collected in field tests, saved with ROS-bags and re-played, often results are different due to non-determinism of process scheduling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Predictable execution under given real-time constraints is a crucial requirement for many robotic applications, but is also a complex and time-consuming activity. While the service-based paradigm of ROS allows a fast integration of many different functionalities, it does not provide sufficient control over the execution management. For example, there are no mechanisms to enforce a certain execution order of callbacks within a node, left alone to configure the  execution order of callbacks of different nodes in a ROS 2 system. This is essential for a high quality of control applications, which consist of cause-effect-chains like sensor acquisition, evaluation and actuation control, and operating on old data due to scheduling is not desired. Furthermore, when input data is collected in field tests, saved with ROS-bags and re-played, often results are different due to non-determinism of process scheduling.
```

The dispatching mechanism resembles the ROS 1 spin thread behavior: the Executor looks up the wait queues, which notifies it of any pending callback in the DDS queue. If there are multiple pending callbacks, the ROS 2 Executor executes them in an in the order as they were registred at the Executor. 

See also section [ROS 2 rclcpp Executor](#ROS-2-rclcpp-Executor) for a more detailed functional desciption and an analysis of its semantics in section [Complex semantic of the ROS 2 Executor](#Complex-semantic-of-the-ROS-2-Executor).

## RCL-Executor

> This section describes a let-executor. It is a first step towards deterministic execution by providing static order scheduling with a let semantics. The abbreviation let stands for Logical-Execution-Time (let) and is a well-known concept in automotive domain to simplify synchronization in process scheduling. If refers to the concept to schedule multiple ready tasks in such a way, that first all input data is read for all tasks, and then all tasks are executed. This removes any inter-dependence of input data among these ready tasks and hence input data synchronization is improved. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes the LET-Executor. It is a first step towards deterministic execution by providing static order scheduling with a let semantics. The abbreviation let stands for Logical-Execution-Time (LET) and is a well-known concept in automotive domain to simplify synchronization in process scheduling. If refers to the concept to schedule multiple ready tasks in such a way, that first all input data is read for all tasks, and then all tasks are executed. This removes any inter-dependence of input data among these ready tasks and hence input data synchronization is improved. 
```
Most times LET is abbreviated with capital letters, as far as I see (Google for: logical execution time).

> This section describes a let-executor. It is a first step towards deterministic execution by providing static order scheduling with a let semantics. The abbreviation let stands for Logical-Execution-Time (let) and is a well-known concept in automotive domain to simplify synchronization in process scheduling. If refers to the concept to schedule multiple ready tasks in such a way, that first all input data is read for all tasks, and then all tasks are executed. This removes any inter-dependence of input data among these ready tasks and hence input data synchronization is improved. 

Reviewer: I would mention automotive only once one the whole page. We might be a bit biased :-)

In the future, we plan to provide other executors with different deterministic semantics.

> ### API Layers

Reviewer: The two APIs are mentioned already before this section, therefore remove the subsubsection API layers here completely, please.

As mentioned in the section [Introduction to Client Library](../), we plan to provide micro-ROS support for the C++ API and for the C API. The Real-Time Executor enriches the C API based on the ROS Client Library (rcl).

### Concept
The let-executor implements a static order scheduler with logical-execution-time(let) semantics [[BP2017](#BP2017)] [[EK2018](#EK2018)]. During configuration the execution order of callbacks is defined and at runtime the callbacks are always processed in this order. The let-semantic refers to reading first all input data from the DDS-queue for all callbacks, storing the received messages or storing the event that a timer is ready. Then, in a second step, all callbacks, timers and the corresponding functions are executed in order as they were defined during configuration phase. 

> ### API

Reviewer: I propose to replace the comprehensive API description (which is also given in the corresponding ROS package) by a short code example (with some ... lines). Also, the two-sentences descriptions of each function rcle_let_executor_set_timeout, etc. are too much here, in my opinion. Explaining the main idea by an example is more important - an easier to maintain in the long-term.
